NLM Citation: Kolb H. Simple Anatomy of the Retina. 2005 May 1 
[Updated 2012 Jan 31]. In: Kolb H, Fernandez E, Jones B, et al., editors. 
Webvision: The Organization of the Retina and Visual System [Internet]. 
Salt Lake City (UT): University of Utah Health Sciences Center; 1995-.
Bookshelf URL: https://www.ncbi.nlm.nih.gov/books/

Simple Anatomy of the Retina

Helga Kolb, PhD 1

Created: May 1, 2005; Updated: January 31, 2012.

1. Overview

When an ophthalmologist uses an ophthalmoscope to look into your eye he sees the following view of the retina 
(Fig. 1).

In the center of the retina is the optic nerve, a circular to oval white area measuring about 2 x 1.5 mm across. 
From the center of the optic nerve radiate the major blood vessels of the retina. Approximately 17 degrees (4.5-5 
mm), or two and half disc diameters to the left of the disc, can be seen the slightly oval-shaped, blood vessel-free 
reddish spot, the fovea, which is at the center of the area known as the macula by ophthalmologists (Fig. 1). An 
animation of the view from iris to retina can be seen in movie 1.

A circular field of approximately 6 mm around the fovea is considered the central retina while beyond this is 
peripheral retina stretching to the ora serrata, 21 mm from the center of the retina (fovea). The total retina is a 
circular disc of between 30 and 40 mm diameter (1-3).

The retina is approximately 0.5 mm thick and lines the back of the eye. The optic nerve contains the ganglion cell 
axons running to the brain and, additionally, incoming blood vessels that open into the retina to vascularize the 
retinal layers and neurons (Fig. 2). A radial section of a portion of the retina reveals that the ganglion cells (the 
output neurons of the retina) lie innermost in the retina closest to the lens and front of the eye, and the 
photosensors (the rods and cones) lie outermost in the retina against the pigment epithelium and choroid. Light 
must, therefore, travel through the thickness of the retina before striking and activating the rods and cones (Fig. 
2). Subsequently the absorbtion of photons by the visual pigment of the photoreceptors is translated into first a 
biochemical message and then an electrical message that can stimulate all the succeeding neurons of the retina. 
The retinal message concerning the photic input and some preliminary organization of the visual image into 
several forms of sensation are transmitted to the brain from the spiking discharge pattern of the ganglion cells.

A simplistic wiring diagram of the retina emphasizes only the sensory photoreceptors and the ganglion cells with 
a few interneurons connecting the two cell types such as seen in figure 3.

When an anatomist takes a vertical section of the retina and processes it for microscopic examination it becomes 
obvious that the retina is much more complex and contains many more nerve cell types than the simplistic

Author Affiliation: 1 Moran Eye Institute, University of Utah School of Medicine, Salt Lake City; Email: 
Helga.kolb@hsc.utah.edu.

Corresponding author.

Copyright: © 2025 Webvision

2
Webvision

scheme (above) had indicated. It is immediately obvious that there are many interneurons packed into the 
central part of the section of retina intervening between the photoreceptors and the ganglion cells (Fig. 4).

All vertebrate retinas are composed of three layers of nerve cell bodies and two layers of synapses (Fig. 5). The
outer nuclear layer contains cell bodies of the rods and cones, the inner nuclear layer contains cell bodies of the 
bipolar, horizontal and amacrine cells and the ganglion cell layer contains cell bodies of ganglion cells and 
displaced amacrine cells. Dividing these nerve cell layers are two neuropils where synaptic contacts occur (Fig. 
5).

The first area of neuropil is the outer plexiform layer (OPL) where connections between rod and cones, and 
vertically running bipolar cells and horizontally oriented horizontal cells occur (Figs. 6 and 7).

The second neuropil of the retina, is the inner plexiform layer (IPL), and it functions as a relay station for the 
vertical-information-carrying nerve cells, the bipolar cells, to connect to ganglion cells (Figs. 8 and 9). In 
addition, different varieties of horizontally- and vertically-directed amacrine cells, interact in further networks to 
influence and integrate the ganglion cell signals. It is at the culmination of all this neural processing in the IPL 
that the message concerning the visual image is transmitted through ganglion cells to the brain along the optic 
nerve.

2. Central and peripheral retina compared

Central retina close to the fovea is considerably thicker than peripheral retina (compare Figs. 10A with 10B). 
This is due to the increased packing density of photoreceptors, particularly the cones, and their associated 
bipolar and ganglion cells in central retina compared with peripheral retina.

Central retina is cone-dominated retina whereas peripheral retina is rod-dominated. Thus in central retina the 
cones are closely spaced and the rods fewer in number between the cones (Figs. 10A and 10B).

The outer nuclear layer (ONL), composed of the cell bodies of the rods and cones, is about the same thickness in 
central and peripheral retina. However in the peripheral retina the rod cell bodies outnumber the cone cell 
bodies while the reverse is true for central retina. In central retina, the cones have oblique axons displacing their 
cell bodies from their synaptic pedicles in the outer plexiform layer (OPL). These oblique axons, with 
accompanying Müller cell processes, form a pale-staining fibrous-looking area known as the Henle fibre layer. 
The latter layer is absent in peripheral retina.

The inner nuclear layer (INL) is thicker in the central area of the retina compared with peripheral retina, due to a 
greater density of cone-connecting second-order neurons (cone bipolar cells), smaller-field and more closely-
spaced horizontal cells, and amacrine cells concerned with the cone pathways (Fig. 10). As we shall see later, 
cone-connected circuits of neurons are less convergent in that fewer cones impinge on second order neurons, 
than rods do in rod-connected pathways.

A remarkable difference between central and peripheral retina can be seen in the relative thicknesses of the inner 
plexiform layers (IPL), ganglion cell layers (GCL) and nerve fibre layers (NFL) (Figs. 10A and 10B). This is again 
due to the greater numbers and increased packing-density of ganglion cells needed for the cone pathways in the 
cone-dominant foveal retina as compared the rod-dominant peripheral retina. The greater number of ganglion 
cells means more synaptic interaction in a thicker IPL and greater numbers of ganglion cell axons coursing to 
the optic nerve in the nerve fibre layer (Fig. 10A).

3. Müller glial cells

Müller cells are the radial glial cells of the retina (Fig. 11). The outer limiting membrane (OLM) of the retina is 
formed from adherens junctions between Müller cells and photoreceptor cell inner segments. The inner limiting

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
3

Figure 1. A view of the retina seen through an ophthalmoscope.

Movie 1. An animation from the iris to the retina.

Download video

4
Webvision

Figure 2. A drawing of a section through the human eye with a schematic enlargement of the retina.

Figure 3. Simple diagram of the organization of the retina.

membrane (ILM) of the retina is likewise composed of laterally contacting Müller cell end feet and associated 
basement membrane constituents.

The OLM forms a barrier between the subretinal space, into which the inner and outer segments of the 
photoreceptors project to be in close association with the pigment epithelial layer behind the retina, and the 
neural retina proper. The ILM is the inner surface of the retina bordering the vitreous humor and thereby 
forming a diffusion barrier between neural retina and vitreous humor (Fig. 11).

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
5

Figure 4. Light micrograph of a vertical section through central human retina.

Throughout the retina the major blood vessels of the retinal vasculature supply the capillaries that run into the 
neural tissue. Capillaries are found running through all parts of the retina from the nerve fibre layer to the outer 
plexiform layer and even occasionally as high as in the outer nuclear layer. Nutrients from the vasculature of the 
choriocapillaris behind the pigment epithelium layer supply the delicate photoreceptor layer.

4. Foveal structure

The center of the fovea is known as the foveal pit (1) and is a highly specialized region of the retina different
again from central and peripheral retina we have considered so far. Radial sections of this small circular region 
of retina measuring less than a quarter of a millimeter (200 μm) across are shown below for human (Fig. 12A) 
and for monkey (Fig. 12B).

6
Webvision

Figure 5. 3-D block of a portion of human retina.

The foveal pit is an area where cone photoreceptors are concentrated at maximum density with exclusion of the 
rods, and arranged at their most efficient packing density which is in a hexagonal mosaic. This is more clearly 
seen in a tangential section through the foveal cone inner segments (Fig. 13).

Below this central 200 μm diameter central foveal pit, the other layers of the retina are displaced concentrically 
leaving only the thinnest sheet of retina consisting of the cone cells and some of their cell bodies. Radially 
distorted but complete layering of the retina then appears gradually along the foveal slope (right and left sides of 
Figs. 12a and 12b) until the rim of the fovea is made up of the displaced second- and third-order neurons related 
to the central cones. Here the ganglion cells are piled into six layers so making this area, called the foveal rim or 
parafovea (1), the thickest portion of the entire retina.

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
7

Figure 6. 3-D block of retina with the outer plexiform layer (OPL) highlighted in red. .

5. Macula lutea

The whole foveal area including foveal pit, foveal slope, parafovea and perifovea is considered the macula of the 
human eye. Familiar to ophthalmologists is a yellow pigmentation to the macular area known as the macula 
lutea (Fig. 14).

This pigmentation is the reflection from yellow screening pigments, the xanthophyll carotenoids zeaxanthin and 
lutein (4), present in the cone axons of the Henle fibre layer. The macula lutea is thought to act as a short 
wavelength filter, additional to that provided by the lens (5). As the fovea is the most essential part of the retina 
for human vision, protective mechanisms for avoiding bright light and especially ultraviolet irradiation damage 
are essential. For if the delicate cones of our fovea are destroyed, we become blind.

The yellow pigment that forms the macula lutea in the fovea can be clearly demonstrated by viewing a section of 
the fovea in the microscope with blue light (Fig. 15). The dark pattern in the foveal pit extending out to the edge 
of the foveal slope is caused by the macular pigment distribution (6).

8
Webvision

Figure 7. Light micrograph of a vertical section through the outer plexiform layer (OPL). Cone pedicles and rod spherules are the 
synaptic terminals of cones and rods. The outer nuclear layer (ONL) contains the cell bodies of rods and cones. The inner nuclear layer 
(INL) contains the cell bodies of horizontal cells, bipolar cells, and amacrine cells.

If one were to visualize the foveal photoreceptor mosaic as though the visual pigments in the individual cones 
were not bleached, one would see the picture shown in Figure 16 (lower frame) (picture from Lall and Cone, 
1996). The short-wavelength sensitive cones on the foveal slope look pale yellow green, the middle wavelength 
cones, pink and the long wavelength sensitive cones, purple. If we now add the effect of the yellow screening 
pigment of the macula lutea we see the appearance of the cone mosaic in Figure 16 (upper frame). The macula 
lutea helps enhance achromatic resolution of the foveal cones and blocks out harmful UV light irradiation (Fig. 
16 from Abner Lall and Richard Cone, unpublished data).

6. Blood supply to the retina

There are two sources of blood supply to the mammalian retina: the central retinal artery and the choroidal 
blood vessels. The choroid receives the greatest blood flow (65-85%) (7) and is vital for the maintainance of the 
outer retina (particularly the photoreceptors) and the remaining 20-30% flows to the retina through the central 
retinal artery from the optic nerve head to nourish the inner retinal layers. The central retinal artery has 4 main 
branches in the human retina (Fig. 17).

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
9

Figure 8. 3-D block of retina with the inner plexiform layer (IPL) highlighted in red.

The arterial intraretinal branches then supply three layers of capillary networks i.e. 1) the radial peripapillary 
capillaries (RPCs) and 2) an inner and 3) an outer layer of capillaries (Fig. 18A). The precapillary venules drain 
into venules and through the corresponding venous system to the central retinal vein (Fig. 18B).

The radial peripapillary capillaries (RPCs) are the most superfical layer of capillaries lying in the inner part of 
the nerve fiber layer, and run along the paths of the major superotemporal and inferotemporal vessels 4-5 mm 
from the optic disk (8). The RPCs anastomose with each other and the deeper capillaries. The inner capillaries lie 
in the ganglion cell layers under and parallel to the RPCs. The outer capillary network runs from the inner 
plexiform layer to the outer plexiform layer thought the inner nuclear layer (8).

As will be noticed from the flourescein angiography of Figure 17, there is a ring of blood vessels in the macular 
area around a blood vessel- and capillary-free zone 450-600 μm in diameter, surrounding the fovea. The macular 
vessels arise from branches of the superior temporal and inferotemporal arteries. At the border of the avascular 
zone the capillaries become two-layered and finally join as a single layered ring. The collecting venules are 
deeper (posterior) to the arterioles and drain blood flow back into the main veins (Fig. 19). In the rhesus

10
Webvision

Figure. 9. Light micrograph of a vertical section through the inner plexiform layer (IPL), highlighted in red. Amacrine cells and bipolar 
cells lie above the IPL. Ganglion cells form the ganglion cell layer (GCL) which lies just below the IPL. Processes from all 3 cell types 
interconnect within IPL circuitry.

monkey this perimacular ring and blood vessel free fovea is clearly seen in the beautiful drawings made by Max 
Snodderly's group (9) (Fig. 20).

The choroidal arteries arise from long and short posterior ciliary arteries and branches of Zinn's circle (around 
the optic disc). Each of the posterior ciliary arteries break up into fan-shaped lobules of capillaries that supply 
localized regions of the choroid (10). The macular area of the choroidal vessels is not specialized like the retinal 
blood supply is (8). The arteries pierce the sclera around the optic nerve and fan out to form the three vascular 
layers in the choroid: outer (most scleral), medial and inner (nearest Bruch’s membrane of the pigment 
epithelium) layers of blood vessels. This is clearly shown in the corrosion cast of a cut face of the human choroid 
in figure 21A (8). The corresponding venous lobules drain into the venules and veins that run anterior towards 
the equator of the eyeball to enter the vortex veins (Fig. 21b). One or two vortex veins drain each of the 4 
quadrants of the eyeball. The vortex veins penetrate the sclera and merge into the ophthalmic vein as shown in 
the corrosion cast of figure 21B (8).

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
11

Figure 10. Different structure of central and peripheral human retina. A. In central retina the inner and outer plexiform layers (IPL, 
OPL) are thicker than in peripheral retina. The inner nuclear and ganglion cell layers (INL, GCL) contain more cells, but of smaller 
diameter. B. Peripheral retina is thinner overall than central retina, though cells are larger in diameter, most layers are thin. The outer 
nuclear layer (ONL) is densely populated with rods. OLM, outer limiting membrane; ILM, inner limiting membrane.

7. Degenerative diseases of the human retina

The human retina is a delicate organization of neurons, glia and nourishing blood vessels. In some eye diseases, 
the retina becomes damaged or compromised, and degenerative changes set in that eventually lead to serious 
damage to the nerve cells that carry the vital messages about the visual image to the brain. We indicate four 
different conditions where the retina is diseased and blindness may be the end result.

Age related macular degeneration is a common retinal problem of the aging eye and a leading cause of blindness 
in the world. The macular area and fovea become compromised due to the pigment epithelium behind the retina 
degenerating and forming drusen (white spots, Fig. 22) and allowing leakage of fluid behind the fovea. The cones 
of the fovea die causing central visual loss so we cannot read or see fine detail.

Glaucoma (Fig. 23) is also a common problem in aging, where the pressure within the eye becomes elevated. The
pressure rises because the anterior chamber of the eye cannot exchange fluid properly by the normal aqueous 
outflow methods. The pressure within the vitreous chamber rises and compromises the blood vessels of the optic 
nerve head and eventually the axons of the ganglion cells so that these vital cells die. Treatment to reduce the 
intraocular pressure is essential in glaucoma.

Retinits pigmentosa (Fig. 24) is a nasty hereditary disease of the retina for which there is no cure at present. It 
comes in many forms and consists of large numbers of genetic mutations presently being analyzed. Most of the 
faulty genes that have been discovered concern the rod photoreceptors. The rods of the peripheral retina begin to 
degenerate in early stages of the disease. Patients become night blind gradually as more and more of the 
peripheral retina (where the rods reside) becomes damaged. Eventually patients are reduced to tunnel vision 
with only the fovea spared the disease process. Characteristic pathology is the occurrence of black pigment in 
the peripheral retina and thinned blood vessels at the optic nerve head (Fig. 24).

Diabetic retinopathy is a side effect of diabetes that affects the retina and can cause blindness (Fig. 25). The vital 
nourishing blood vessels of the eye become compromised, distorted and multiply in uncontrollable ways. Laser

12
Webvision

Figure 11. Vertical view of Golgi-stained Müller glial cells. OLM, outer limiting membrane; ILM, inner limiting membrane.

treatment for stopping blood vessel proliferation and leakage of fluid into the retina, is the commonest treatment 
at present.

About the Author

The biosketch for Helga Kolb appears in the Webvision section About the Editors.

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
13

Figure 12. Foveal regions of primate retinas. A. Vertical section of the human fovea from Yamada, 1969 (11). os, outer segments; is, 
inner segments; OLM, outer limiting membrane; ONL, outer nuclear layer; H, Henle fibers; INL, inner nuclear layer; ILM, inner 
limiting membrane; G, ganglion cells. B. Vertical section of monkey fovea from Hageman and Johnson, 1991 (12). RPE. Retinal 
pigment epithelium; Henle f.l., Henle fiber layer; OPL, outer plexiform layer; INL, inner nuclear layer; IPL, inner plexiform layer; GCL, 
ganglion cell layer.

Figure 13. Tangential section through the human fovea. Reproduced from Ahnelt, Kolb and Pflug (1987) (13).

14
Webvision

Figure 14. Ophthalmoscopic appearance of the retina to show the macula lutea (yellow area around the fovea).

Figure 15. Vertical section through the monkey fovea to show the distribution of the macula lutea (black). From Snodderly et al., 1984 
(6).

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
15

Figure 16. Appearance of the cone mosaic in the fovea as seen with (above) and without (below) the macula lutea screening pigment. 
The image is courtesy of Abner Lall (Howard University) and Richard Cone (Johns Hopkins University).

16
Webvision

Figure 17. Fundus photograph showing fluorescein imaging of the major arteries and veins in a normal human right eye retina. The
vessels emerge from the optic nerve head and run in a radial fashion, curving toward and around the fovea (asterisk in photograph). 
The image is courtesy of Isabel Pinilla, Spain.

Figure 18. Microvasculature of the retina. A. Flatmount view of a rat retina stained with NADPH-diaphorase at the level of focus of a 
major artery and arterioles. B. Flatmount view of a rat retina stained with NADPH-diaphorase at the level of focus of a major vein and 
venules. The images are courtesy of Toby Holmes, Moran Eye Center.

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
17

Figure 19. The macular vessels of the monkey eye form a ring around the avascular fovea (star). A, arteriole; V, venule. The illustration 
is from Zhang, 1994 (8).

18
Webvision

Figure 20. Diagram of the retinal vasculature around the fovea in the rhesus monkey derived from more than 80 microscope fields. The
figure is from Snodderly et al., 1992 (9).

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
19

Figure 21. Corrosion casts of the vasculature of the human eye. A. The three vascular layers in the choroid: outer arteries and veins 
(red/blue arrow), medial arterioles and venules (red arrow), and inner capillary bed (yellow star). B. Cast of the upper back of the 
human eye with the sclera removed. The vortex veins (VV) collect the blood from the equator of the eye and merge with the 
ophthalmic vein (OV). The illustrations are from From Zhang 1994 (8).

20
Webvision

Figure 22. A view of the fundus of the eye and of the retina in a patient who has age-related macular degeneration.

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
21

Figure 23. A view of the fundus of the eye and of the retina in a patient who has advanced glaucoma.

22
Webvision

Figure 24. A view of the fundus of the eye and of the retina in a patient who has retinitis pigmentosa.

Simple Anatomy of the Retina
23

Figure 25. A view of the fundus of the eye and of the retina in a patient who has advanced diabetic retinopathy.

References

1.
Polyak, S.L., The Retina1941, Chicago: University of Chicago.
2.
Kolb, H., The neural organization of the human retina., in Principles and practice of clinical electrophysiology 
of vision, J.R. Heckenlively and G.B. Arden, Editors. 1991, Mosby Year Book: St. Louis. p. 25-52.
3.
Van Buren, J.M., The retinal ganglion cell layer : a physiological-anatomical correlation in man and primates of 
the normal topographical anatomy of the retinal ganglion cell layer and its alterations with lesions of the visual 
pathways1963, Springfield, Ill.: Charles C. Thomas. x, 143 p.
4.
Bone R.A., Landrum J.T., Tarsis S.L. Preliminary identification of the human macular pigment. . Vision Res. 
1985;25(11):1531–5. PubMed PMID: 3832576.

24
Webvision

5.
Rodieck, R.W., The vertebrate retina; principles of structure and function. Series of books in biology. 1973, 
San Francisco,: Freeman. x, 1044 p.
6.
Snodderly D.M., Auran J.D., Delori F.C. The macular pigment. II. Spatial distribution in primate retinas. . 
Invest Ophthalmol Vis Sci. 1984;25(6):674–85. PubMed PMID: 6724837.
7.
Henkind, P., R.I. Hansen, and J. Szalay, Ocular circulation, in Physiology of the human eye and visual system, 
R.E. Records, Editor. 1979, Harper & Row: Hagerstown, Md. p. 98-155.
8.
Zhang H.R. Scanning electron-microscopic study of corrosion casts on retinal and choroidal angioarchitecture 
in man and animals. . Progress in Retinal and Eye Research. 1994;13(1):243–270.
9.
Snodderly D.M., Weinhaus R.S., Choi J.C. Neural-vascular relationships in central retina of macaque monkeys 
(Macaca fascicularis). . J Neurosci. 1992;12(4):1169–93. PubMed PMID: 1556592.
10. Hayreh S.S. Segmental nature of the choroidal vasculature. . Br J Ophthalmol. 1975;59(11):631–48. PubMed 
PMID: 812547.
11. Yamada E. Some structural features of the fovea centralis in the human retina. . Arch Ophthalmol. 
1969;82(2):151–9. PubMed PMID: 4183671.
12. Hageman, G.S. and L.V. Johnson, The photoreceptor-retinal pigmented epithelium interface., in Principles and

practice of clinical electrophysiology of vision, J.R. Heckenlively and G.B. Arden, Editors. 1991, Mosby Year 
Book: St. Louis. p. 53-68.
13. Ahnelt P.K., Kolb H., Pflug R. Identification of a subtype of cone photoreceptor, likely to be blue sensitive, in the

human retina. . J Comp Neurol. 1987;255(1):18–34. PubMed PMID: 2434534.

License

All copyright for chapters belongs to the individual authors who created them. However, for non-commercial, academic 
purposes, images and content from the chapters portion of Webvision may be used with a non-exclusive rights under a 
Attribution, Noncommercial 4.0 International (CC BY-NC) Creative Commons license. Cite Webvision, http://
webvision.med.utah.edu/ as the source. Commercial applications need to obtain license permission from the 
administrator of Webvision and are generally declined unless the copyright owner can/wants to donate or license 
material. Use online should be accompanied by a link back to the original source of the material. All imagery or content 
associated with blog posts belong to the authors of said posts, except where otherwise noted.